Welcome to the NCTraCS tutorial series.
Today's topic is about confidence interval and prediction interval.
There are key concepts in statistical inference and estimation rather than in hypothesis testing specifically.
These two concepts provide critical insights into the precision of estimates and predictions across various
statistical analysis.
As a reminder, our motivation example is to investigate whether smoking reduces lung function.
Forced Vital Capacity was measured in 100 men, of whom 36 were smokers and 94 were non-smokers.
We have the statistics of these two groups, including mean, standard deviation, standard error, listed in
the table. A confidence interval, in short CI, provides a range of values that is likely to contain the
true population parameter based on the sample data.
It provides an interval estimate for a population parameter, such as the mean and proportion.
An example is the main lung function of smokers.
The interpretation of the confidence interval is that, take a level of 5% as an example,
a 95% confidence interval means that if we were to take many samples and calculate the CI for each
sample, about 95 percent of those intervals would contain the true population mean. For the smoking and
lung function study,
if we were to take many samples and calculate the CI for each sample,
about 95% of those intervals would contain the true mean FVC of smokers.
Typically, for a sample mean,
the confidence interval is calculated as, CI equals X bar plus minus Z times S divided
by the square root of N.
And here, X bar is the sample mean, and Z is the z-score for the desired
confidence interval, s is the sample standard deviation, and N is the sample size.
And now, let's move to the prediction interval.
A prediction interval estimates the range within which an individual future observation is likely to
fall based on the sample data.
It provides an interval for an individual outcome, in the smokers and lung function example,
the prediction interval describes an interval for the FVC for a single smoker in the future.
The interpretation of a 95% prediction interval is that 95% of individual observations are expected to
fall within this range if sampled repeatedly. In the same smoking study,
if we calculate a 95% prediction interval for FVC,
we may say that 95% of FVC for an individual smoker will fall within this interval if
sampled repeatedly. For a prediction interval,
the calculation is similar but includes an additional variance to account for the uncertainty in predicting
an individual value.
Here, the prediction interval equals X bar plus minus Z times the square root of S squared times one over N
plus one, where the square root adjusts for both sample mean and individual observation variances.
Here, we compare the key differences between the confidence interval and prediction interval.
First, confidence intervals estimate population parameters while the prediction intervals estimate individual future
values. And regarding the width of intervals,
confidence intervals tend to be narrower than prediction intervals because they focus on estimating the mean,
not individual outcomes.
While the prediction intervals are wider than confidence intervals because they account for both the variability in estimating the
mean and the additional variability around individual data points.
They also differ in interpretation context.
The confidence intervals are about parameter estimation in a population, while the prediction intervals relate to
individual predictions within that population.
The primary area of intervals is used for parameter estimation in inferential statistics,
while the prediction intervals are core to predictive analysis and forecasting.
The figure on the right side is the plot of prediction interval and confidence interval using the data set
of the FVC example,
which is the same data set we used in the previous tutorials.
The black dot here represents the mean of FVC, and the blue lines represent the
confidence interval, and the red lines represent the prediction interval
around the mean, we can see that the prediction interval is wider than the confidence interval to capture individual
variations.
The interpretation of these two intervals is, for the confidence interval,
we say if we were to take many samples and calculate the confidence interval for each sample,
about 95% of those intervals would contain the true mean FVC of smokers.
This interval only reflects uncertainty around the mean FVC, not individual values.
For the prediction interval,
we say 95% of FVC for an individual smoker will fall within this interval if sampled repeatedly.
This interval reflects uncertainty around an individual measurement,
not the group's average.
Thank you for your attention.
I will see you in the next video.